---
title: "(109) First pilot outcomes – an external observation report (2)"
slug: "109-First-pilot-outcomes-an-external-observation-report-2"
author: "Onno Hansen-Staszyński"
date: "2025-04-01"
updated: "2025-04-01"
description: " The second observation report on Interdemocracy’s third pilot by a Pomeranian Center for Teacher Education’s representative."
draft: false
---
## Description of the observation of classes conducted using the “Interdemocracy” method and format 
*by Łukasz Franków - Teacher-consultant for psychological and pedagogical support, PCEN*\
\
The classes observed as part of the “Interdemocracy” method and format were conducted in grades 7 and 8 of Primary School No. 47 in Gdynia. They were divided into two 90-minute sessions. The first took place on January 12, and the second on February 9, 2026. The class groups were diverse in terms of the individual abilities of the students and their educational needs.\
The lessons were conducted in accordance with the “Interdemocracy” format. In the first part, students listened to an introductory lecture, after which they individually formulated their statements in response to a question posed by the teacher. In the second part, they could refer to the presented method and share reflections on the benefits of participating in the classes. During the lessons, principles of universal design were applied through the use of various tools and activities supporting student participation and communication, including digital technology. The rule of not commenting on others’ statements was observed, which fostered a sense of safety among participants and sincerity in their responses. An important element in developing participants’ autonomy was the possibility to refuse to present one’s opinion, as well as to express a critical view.\
All students from two seventh-grade classes and one eighth-grade class participated in the classes held on January 12. Some of them were very active, while others did not show much activity. However, the structure of the lesson was designed in such a way that less active students were also engaged in its course. During the observation, it could be noted that some students may not have been adequately prepared to participate in classes conducted in the “Interdemocracy” format or had not reached a developmental stage that would enable greater involvement in the activities prepared by the teacher. The large group size may also have influenced the situation.\
From a discussion held at the end of the meeting, it follows that despite the 90-minute duration of the classes and the need to follow the teacher’s instructions, students did not feel overly burdened nor experience excessive stress related to speaking in front of others, including in the presence of observers and people recording the classes with television cameras. The students stated that they see the possibility of using the “interdemocracy” format in various subjects.\
The classes conducted on February 9 were attended by volunteer students from the aforementioned classes, which balanced the level of engagement. The statements presented contained more informational content. After the lesson, students pointed out that classes in inter-class groups facilitate relationship-building, help in getting to know new people, and contribute to building a positive social climate in the school.\
An advantage of this type of class format is that students recognize mutual diversity and have the opportunity to discover the potential of individuals who, in a traditional organization of classes, have fewer opportunities for active participation. In the long term, this may also contribute to increasing the level of social sensitivity and responsiveness in situations requiring support for someone in a difficult situation.\
In summary, it can be stated that the classes were conducted in accordance with the “interdemocracy” format, which created opportunities for engagement by different individuals with varying developmental potential. The predictable lesson structure and established rules increase students’ sense of safety, which fosters openness of expression and teaches courage in formulating one’s own opinions, including critical ones toward the stated thesis. Classes in diverse groups of smaller size contribute to building social relationships at the whole-school level. To fully utilize the potential of the method, it is necessary to develop general social competencies among young people and, in cases requiring adaptation, to prepare students in advance in small groups.
